# Concerns for Using AI as a Coding Agent

Over the past few months I regularly use AI for various tasks. When I bought my Google phone, google gave me a free subscription to Gemini, their AI assistant. I use copilot regularly. At work I have subscriptions to OpenAI systems, which I use for both coding and chat experience. I also use Claude to program. I use these systems regularly. I also develop AI systems for my job, so I feel like I have knowledge and insight that others may not have related to AI systems. A huge problem I see with AI systems is most people don't have a good mental model for how to understand what AI models are doing and how they work. This means it is easy to extend them beyond their capabilities. Hopefully I can help provide a good mental model for how AI systems function so it will be easier to identify where AI systems may be useful and where they fail.

The recent AI craze was started by OpenAI with the ChatGPT system. Here, when I talk about _AI_ I will mean Large Language Models (LLMs). Many other _AI_ systems exist, but for the purposes of this article, LLMs will be the focus.

Just because I _may_ say something that is critical of AI and LLMs, this does not mean I am a Luddite. Modern technology, including AI systems, are tools. Understanding how the tools function is the best way to leverage the tool appropriately. If I gave you a hammer and told you it can be used to connect two pieces of wood together, hammering screws into the wood will work and it will get the job done, but it is not an appropriate way to use the hammer. With a proper mental model about how tools work we can more appropriate understand the limits of each tool. All I am saying is if I say not to hit screws with a hammer it does not mean I don't like hammers, even if it would work.

## Training an AI

LLM models are trained on massive datasets of written word. Massive is an understatement. All known human written knowledge available to the AI companies are used to train the models. Anything that they can get their hands on, which is a lot. The total sum of all human written knowledge is massive.

This includes websites, such as those you can collect yourself at [common crawl](https://commoncrawl.org/), books, articles, codebases. Everything you can find that is written down is used. For modern AI systems, collecting massive datasets is fundamental to creating good models.

All of this data is converted to _tokens_, numeric representations of portions of words. You can copy text into the [OpenAI Tokenizer](https://platform.openai.com/tokenizer) and it will report the numeric representation of the text you entered. Different models may tokenize differently. For now, what maters is segments of text are converted to numbers. The AI interacts with the numeric representations of chunks of words.

At a high level, LLMs are given a series of words, converted to tokens. They will generate a response that is the most likely tokens that would appear based on the input tokens. These tokens are then converted back into words because humans understand words, not tokens. When generating a response, the AI models will not always give the same answer because developers have found adding some randomness to the output can be good.

Models differ in a few ways. How they determine what the "most probable" next token based on past tokens. Models will have different number of internal tokens to help it determine probable next tokens, but how it consumes the input prompt is also important. However, all of the major LLM models use the same fundamental approach. They consume input prompts, process data based on generating a model of _human language_, and produce a response built on the model of _human language_.

I don't know if this surprises you as much as it surprises me. I have several take aways when I realized this about how AIs work. AIs do a great job at predicting text. This is no doubt because of the massive quantity of text that exists for training. Without understanding anything about written language, the AI is able to generate text using rules it has learned based on historical data. It knows it should use a comma where it does because it has seen enough examples that it it can precisely _predict_ where a comma should be.

## My Understanding of how Humans learn

Now we have a basic description of how LLMs are trained and what they do, lets consider my understanding of how humans learn.

I love to read. I like to think I read a lot, but I expect I am only average. I read, on average, 12-20 books per year. Some books are non-fiction, some technical, some fiction. I read articles online and I read reports written by others. Honestly, I am an average consumer of literature. However, I am not match for the LLM. I can't do it, but I also don't need to do it because I learn a different way because I consume information in a fundamentally different way.

When I was taking classes in college I would read a small amount of text (compared to what an AI can consume) and I would build a mental model about the topic. My University Physics professor did a great job trying to teach concepts rather then equations. For example, we learned that if we model the world as objects with mass objects with more mass will require more force to accelerate the object. I see this as I interact with the world. With this mental model I can easily understand how to use the equations. I understand the concepts enough I can derive some of these physics equations.

I have to make use of my limited memory and time to consume information. I do this by trying to build mental models of different parts of the world. The mental models can be extended or adapted as I learn more about the world, but this is the only way I am able to comprehend the world.

When I am processing information, I will _think_ through a problem using language. I might write out what I am thinking based on my mental model. This is exactly what I am doing right now. I am trying to explain my mental model of how I process information and how I understand an AI processes information. As I am thinking through this I am trying to extend my mental models and see how they can applied to each other. I am using my mental model to generate the text I am producing to write this article.

## Applying Knowledge

My experience has developed how I understand how LLMs process information and how I process information. In school, some tests were based on applying what I learned to problems that were not explicitly discussed in class. If was able to develop a good and correct mental model I would be able to apply it on the test to produce the correct answer.

An LLM on the other hand is like the student who does not fully understand the material. On a math test he will memorize the equations and strategically place values into the formula. Remember, the LLM has likely seen the accumulation of all human knowledge. It is very likely it has seen questions very similar to the ones being asked. Also, remember an LLM is a language model. It is generating text based on a language model, predicting next tokens based on input tokens. It does not have theory of mind. It does not have a model of how the world works. It is only a language model which as seen and may have access to all written human knowledge.

AI systems are very impressive. They are amazing at what they do, I just think most people don't know what they do. Also, I think a major takeaway here is not about how impressive AI systems are, I think a bigger take away should be how _bad_ Google was. It was pretty good, but with AI systems I am now able to see Google frequently lead me to less quality answers compared to what I was looking for. There is a lot of information I was not able to easily find using Google but now I can find it. Once some language system read the accumulated knowledge of humanity, when I ask a question I am more likely to find the answer (not from the AI, but often from looking through the links the AI referenced).

Also, many people ask very similar questions about the world. If the AI is trained to answer common questions (because it is a language model trained on all written information generated by humans), it will be able to answer most of these questions effectively. If I ask "how to change a tire?" a language model will be able to generate an accurate response because it has been written about many times. LLM systems do well on tests where there is a lot of public data about the topic. I can easily find many AP practice tests or AP learning guides for many AP topics. As a language model, eventually patterns will become clear for what values to put where when certain things are asked. The language model does not need to understand the topic to get a good test score. It only needs to know how to play the game at test taking, which it does very well.

## Using AI as a coding agent

Lets apply this to generating code. Many people use AI coding agents. I use Claude and Codex at work. Why do we need to be careful about using AI coding agents? Lets think about when people use them and why.

I remember when I first saw a demo inside the company of an AI coding agent. How do you decide what to ask it to see if you should trust it? In the meeting we asked it a question you might ask a college student in a programming class, or questions you might ask in an interview. We were basically interviewing the AI coding agent. We asked it to write a [red-black tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red%E2%80%93black_tree). Unsurprisingly, it did a very good job writing the code. It thought of corner cases we did not think of. It had well-documented functions. It would have received a solid **A** from this implementation. Why is this unsurprising? It has seen thousands of red-black tree implementations because it is a common programming assignment. We continued to ask it other questions and it did phenomenal at all of them. Every one of the questions is something that would be seen on a test or coding interview.

After everyone was so impressed we tried to start using it. Once you have confidence that the AI is able to code effectively, what do you have it do next? Same things I would ask a junior developer to do. Go figure out something and program it, then show it to me for review. The _problem_ with this is the AI coding agent learns from what it has seen before. Many questions I can easily verify the AI will be very good at. Problems I want it to solve are ones I can't easily verify (otherwise I might as well solve the problem myself). The AI system does not have a mental model of how things work, it has a language model. It does very good generating text, but it is not based on fundamental principles.

When I review code generated my AI that I can verify, I spend a lot of time giving it corrections. It does a poor job generating quality code. A big problem with this is that I am not spending time _generating_ code, I am spending time _telling others why the code they had the AI coding agent generated_ is bad. This takes a massive amount of time from me. The alternative is just to trust it, but we can see what happens when you do that (I expect Google does this a lot and this is why many of their AI apps throw errors after using it for a short amount of time).

The fundamental problem is that tasks we can verify for coding agents are the ones it will do very good solving. The tasks that I want it to solve, on the other hand, are difficult for me to verify because they are not nearly as common. The AI coding agent can get a "correct" answer, but it is not because it knows how to program. It is because it knows how to randomly guess right, which it does. It does not understand the system, but generates text that seems like it does. The mental model we should be using for LLMs, and AI coding agents, is they are like the student who memorizes material and has seen so much that they are able to guess correct in many cases, but they do **not** fundamentally understand the material or how to extend it abstractly.

For the time being, AI developers are working at trying to take a system that does a very good job guessing better and guessing. It does a very good job at this, but fundamentally it is not "smart", it is very good at guessing. I would be too if I read everything ever written by mankind. Until there is a fundamental shift in how AI systems are designed, the mental model presented above is probably the best way to understand how you should treat AI system when interacting with it.

## A Few Funny Things the AI Has Told Me

I think AI is fun to use for comical purposes, because it can get things so weird. Here are a few things the AI told me. After I look at some of these responses it is clear the AI does not have a mental model of the world.

- The main reason my kids don't like doing chores is because I buy them the wrong type of underwear to do chores in.
- If my friends smell bad, I should not tell them because I might cause them to start taking an unhealthy number of showers every day and they will grind off their skin, which is not good.
- When eating Doritos chips, I should eat them upside down.
  - I did not know doritos had a side. I assume they are mixed around in the bad so both sides are equally flavored. I can't tell which way is up or down, so I don't know how to follow the AI's advice here.
- When taking a test, I should only use blue ink pens because blue is calming and will encourage better memory recall. Any other color of pen will be detrimental to my success.
- When telling stories, I should avoid wearing pants because pants are too restricting around my legs, and the bifurcating pant legs will cause too many side stories. Best to wear a toga when telling stories.
- When I asked about how to capture a Rhino it gave me a very detailed description of how to do it, including where to go, when to go, what types of tranquilizers to use. Then it thanked me for protecting rhinos from poachers. I never told it why I wanted a rhino.
- I should avoid wearing shoes outside because is I don't wear shoes it will help my negative ions (which is causing negative energy) to be released to the ground, allowing me to collect positive ions from the ground, helping me improve positive energy.
- AI is not a bubble because many companies that are going big on AI have a lot of money. Once AI funding starts to dry up the bigger companies, like Google and Microsoft, will just buy up all the smaller companies, so there will not be a crash.

The absurdity of these remarks is because the LLM does not have a good model of how the world works. My point is to be very careful about using a system that does not understand how the world works to tell you how to live in the world. If you are not able to verify the AI's claims easily, you should not trust the AI. However, most of the times where an AI system would be useful is when I don't know very much about a topic and is precisely where I can't easily verify claims.